---
layout: post
title: Enabling _Cross-Domain AJAX_ in _Firefox_
permalink: /2007/06/enabling-cross-domain-ajax-in-firefox.html
summary: Tonight I have finally conquered one of the biggest annoyances of the past year for me (in terms of development at least). Developing web applications with Firefox is a pleasure because of the "firebug extension":http://www.getfirebug.com/. Nothing comes close in Safari. Unfortunately, Firefox doesn't allow cross-domain XMLHttpRequests for security reasons. While good security is a plus, this restriction can make development and testing a real chore. For those of us willing to risk the security vulnerability, here is how to bypass the cross-domain restriction once and for all.
---

<div class="note">
Updated 2009-12-13: This post seems to be the most popular of those from the old incarnation of this blog. As such I've decided to migrate it over. Unfortunately I can't migrate the comments as well. One comment which seems that it might be useful comes from "stefano":http://myblog.digitalemagine.com/ (I've editorialized somewhat):

bq. Good trick, but there's an easier way to enable cross domain without editing config files by hand. Type "about:config" in your URL bar, then right click on the list of preferences and select the _New_ -> _String_ contextual menu. Add *capability.policy.default.XMLHttpRequest.open* as key name and *allAccess* as value. I do not remember if this is taken into account immediately or if you have to reboot. Done!

I'm also not positive if this works in newer versions of FF(firefox), and I haven't tested it. Feel free to let everybody know in the comments.
</div>

{{ page.summary }}

# <p>Close Firefox
# <p>Edit the file *prefs.js* in your Firefox user profile folder
# <p>Add the following line anywhere in the file:
{% highlight javascript %}
user_pref("capability.policy.default.XMLHttpRequest.open",
          "allAccess");
{% endhighlight %}
# <p>Save the file and re-open Firefox. You can now risk your life and limb by doing XHR(XMLHttpRequests)'s to whatever domains you want - congratulations!
